Is she there?
I think we're gonna, you may need to ask her
to accept Diane online.
Can you please, um, accept to be on the panel?
Yes. You can see now. Hello Diane.
You have to unmute yourself.
You still, uh, yeah, it's good. Now we can hear you.
Diane, we have, um, five minutes with you.
Okey do. Thank you. Okay.
So my written response to this bill was a response
to the part of Bill concerning surveillance
of our communications
and the overregulation of providers,
which will see them leave the tiny New Zealand market
isolating us from important communications.
So many people have already spoken about the tech aspects
of this bill and the changes needed to safeguard the flow
of information under Bora.
And therefore, I do not feel the need
to repeat these details,
but support the strongest measures to protect our freedom
to give and receive ideas without surveillance keeping
end-to-end encryption in tact with no back doors,
with the many examples of privacy breaches to choose from,
manage my health being the latest.
Why would we trust you to remove our rights to privacy?
Through this overregulation of decryption
expanded interception and forced compliance platforms
that offer secure communication, everyone needs
to feel safe in their dialogue with friends and family.
And by safe, I don't mean safe from the undefinable
hate speech, but safe to discuss and disagree about ideas.
Safe to discuss where grandma put the family silver
for safekeeping, or even if there was any silver, free
and safe to share and discuss events overseas.
As our nightly news is limited, safety comes
with the ability to freely ask questions of each other.
Sometimes discussing if something shared on any platform,
if it's real AI generated
or recycled old news made to look new,
we don't need some government bureaucrat
to shield us from whatever their idea is of misinformation.
We're not mushrooms, but people who are capable
of critical thinking, able to discuss ideas
and have different opinions.
So, um, why is government
so intent on controlling the population's communications
from the undefinable hate speech laws that keep reappearing
to this attempt to remove privacy in our conversations?
The desire to control is often born out of fear.
So why are you so fearful?
You can already surveil the bad guys.
Like the person who committed the knife attack in the
supermarket in often surveilling him,
didn't stop him from doing the attack.
It didn't take, it didn't make any of his victims any safer.
He didn't post about it on signal before he did it.
And if he did, are we going
to start arresting people for pre-crime?
Like in the minority report, the labor government,
or the, sorry, the Labor Party uses signal
for their communications,
or at least they did a few years ago.
So Signal is an end-to-end encrypted service
created by a Russian.
And using a secure service
simply means they didn't want other parties hacking their
comms and knowing their campaign plans.
I'd be surprised if other parties didn't use a secure
service for the same reason.
It's a smart thing to do.
Decrypting messages means that they'll be looked at
for suspicious words, much like so-called hate speech.
Overseas Cure Starmer has the police focusing on words in
online posts while knife attacks rapes, robbery, real crime
spirals outta control.
Albanese has pushed through the under 16 ban on social
media, which some say has had little
to no effect on this age group accessing social media.
Even though many accounts have been deleted,
new ones pop up on other platforms.
And now with the new hate speech laws that have been rushed
through and are retrospective, our Aussie prisons big enough
to hold all these new lawbreakers
for posting something 10 years ago that someone has dug up
and suddenly has hurt feelings over.
Or will they follow Britain's example
and release actual criminals early
to make room for grannies?
Who posted a meme? Someone took offense to
Canada has also passed authoritarian laws around speech.
And I mentioned what's happening overseas
because here in New Zealand, it's often been said
by some politicians that we need to pass this law or that
because others are doing it and we can't be left behind.
Oh, dear. No, sometimes being left behind is a good thing.
As many wise mothers would tell their children,
if everyone else is jumping off a cliff, does
that mean you don't have to?
So that's it.
All right. No, thank you so much.
Um, we don't have enough time left d for a question.
Thank you for his contribution.
Okay, great. Thank you. Um, next?
Yeah, so we wait for Jeff to connect online.
We trying to save time. Time They are.
Hi there. Hello, Jeff.
Um, thank you so much for your submission.
We have five minutes with you. Thank you so much.
Okay. So, um, I'm a four decade journalist.
I worked for 40 years in journalism, um, accredited
to the Parliament and, um, it covered all sorts
of major stories, uh, when journalism was, uh,
designed for to inform the public, honestly.
And without ideological distortion
or political fashions, the fourth estate, uh,
was working on behalf of the people.
An example of the breakdown of this though, um, from,
from a formal complaint I made to TVNZ in late 2021
when their lead story said
that there was a march on in Wellington
with increased racism and violence as the main heading.
Um, this was, uh, my complaint was dismissed,
relying heavily on the commentary from an Auckland
University academic, invoking vague
and unsupported claims of white supremacy.
There were obviously being guided as to what
to say on the news item.
This was not evidence-based journalism.
It was ideological narrative presented
as fact very disturbing.
Um, a family legacy, uh, of mine was that
three generations have have served in,
in the military for New Zealand.
My grandfather in the First World War on the som, my father
in the Second World War on the Solomon Islands,
and I did my duty in the compulsory military training.
And yet, um, as a New Zealander, I feel the freedoms
that we all fought for are going to be
swept away in one foul swoop.
Um, this bill represents a fundamental loss
of hard won liberties and single legislative stroke.
This bill dismantles protections
and freedoms that generations fought to establish
with little regard for the long term consequences
of democratic restraint or democratic.
Why is this not going to a referendum?
For instance, the warning signs were evident in
2021 during the lockdown, the rapid expansion
of the state surveillance all to some private company, such
as the installation of 29 cameras in the two kilometers.
The stretch of street down below me here
signaled a troubling shift towards normalizing intrusive
oversight under the guise of public safety.
This bill expands that surveillance exponentially
as a grandparent of 21 grandchildren.
I'm deeply troubled with the erosion of the freedoms
they will inherit, driven not by public mandate,
but by external pressures
and unaccountable international influences.
That's my statement.
Thank you. Any questions? Members?
Um, I'll ask a question. Jeff.
Uh, can you tell us in the bill where you think it, um,
might overreach in terms in uh, terms of dec decryption, uh,
decryption powers?
Yes, because, you know, uh, we can't discuss, as the lady
before me said that I have a stash
of silver in my house here
and that I can't talk to my family about the fact that
that's going to, you know, keep them in future
or whatever, you know, whatever.
There's, that is,
that's a private conversation between ourselves.
It's gonna be part of the ether
and everyone's gonna be able to share it and check it out
and say, oh look, he's mentioning what his code is for his,
his alarm system for his house.
You know, we can make note of that.
So, you know, it's, it's just, it means there is no freedom,
no freedom of speech.
I get that. I was asking
where in the bill you think it's overreaching?
If you could point out in the bill
where it's overreaching in terms of decryption powers. So
You want me to discuss which cha which, which,
Uh, which part in the bill you think
it's overreaching? Well,
In any decryption, um, is, is that, I mean,
it's a very lengthy piece here,
but, um, the regulatory, uh, act, um,
2001,
um, uh, hang on a second.
Yeah, I'm, I've, I've got pages
of it here open in front of me.
I haven't actually highlighted. I just wanted to make
that statement that I've, you know, I've been a,
a career journalist
and I'm feeling very, very dis comfortable, uncomfortable
with this whole idea of opening it up for overseas
players who are providing us with services
that they can actually decrypt our,
and, you know, our messages.
Sorry, we've run outta time now. Yeah, yeah.
But thank you for your submission.
Okay. Thank you. Have a good day. Bye-bye. Thank
You. Bye.
Jean Jeanette Williams.
She coming through? Oh good,
all
Janet, thank you so much for your submission.
We have five minutes with you.
Okay. Hi. Thank you very much for hearing me today.
I oppose the, um, telecommunications
and other matters amendment bill
because it left me with a lot of questions.
It was vague, broad, and confusing
and even inaccurate in part, um, it doesn't differentiate
between non-compliance and alleged non-compliance.
It is hurried and I believe it threatens
our civil liberties.
It expands both surveillance and enforcement powers.
There was so little time to ponder these changes
because they were being rushed through
during our summer holidays.
I only found out the same day
that the submissions were closing.
This bill has effects on our, our freedom of expression
and law at weakens opportunities for free speech
and a secure society.
It doesn't have sufficient safeguards.
This bill would expand surveillance powers
to overseas platforms so that offshore providers are subject
to New Zealand law.
It creates a kill switch to shut down services
and lets officials bypass courts.
Where is the transparency?
Where is the right to be notified and the right of response
before imposing these measures?
The ability to shut down
or censor our access to information is based on what
political grounds.
How will we know this bill would introduce new powers,
but limited oversight?
Where is the access to a dispute resolution scheme?
When dispute resolution schemes are not required
to contact third parties to provide their dispute, I believe
that there should be a clear definition
for independent assessment, notice or right of response.
It needs to include safeguards and reasons
and the opportunity to respond.
What does it mean for New Zealand's economical, economic
and digital competitiveness?
To expand state interception
and enforcement powers,
this Bill weakens end-to-end encryption
and risks overseas digital
platform services withdrawing from New Zealand
weakening encryption and otherwise bypassing.
It exposes new Zealanders to abuse and surveillance
and signals that New Zealand is not a secure
or a predictable place for future investments.
Encryption is an essential tool of a free society.
Do we want to stifle freedom?
Telecommunications have become very vital
to most New Zealanders
and we expect to have world class connectivity.
We deserve laws that protect free expression and privacy.
Not ones that will dismantle them
during the school holidays when we are otherwise distracted.
Independent journalists like the gentleman before you
before me, businesses, political discussion,
personal data security, personal conversations,
lawful protests, safety for vulnerable groups.
They all need encryption and expect privacy and security
and be able to speak freely, not interception
of our communications.
Encryption is essential for privacy and security
and free expression.
And we need stronger encryption.
Not weakened is it to be used for information gathering
to shut down opposing views, to punish people
for their opinions, to silence descent, to close debate,
to silence and convenient voices
so people can no longer comment on this world.
For fear of the consequences.
Debate is how we solve problems.
By talking them through human rights are available
to all of us in society.
It worries me that our human rights are
continuing to be abused.
We haven't even had them that long.
The New Zealand Bill of Rights only since 1990.
The Human Rights Act only since 1993.
In today's world, governments healthcare
and mainstream media police in the legal system which were
once seen as pillars of the community, now seem
to be sidestepping public good
and past accepted behavior on common decency.
We risk losing our societal values of fairness, justice
and health that our society was built on.
Public trust is declining.
I'm wondering how much scrutiny this bill has received.
Public transparency equals public confidence
and the negative consequences
of this bill cannot be overstated.
That was well timed. Um, Janet, thank you so much.
Have a good day. Thank
You. Thank you too. Bye-bye.
How do I leave?
Do it for you. We all ask that question.
Answer it.
Join the panel. I think there's a song about that. Alright.
You can check in, but
John, Can you please AEP to be on the panel
so that we can talk to you?
Thanks Dawn,
You up?
Yes. Uh, we can see you and uh, we can hear you as well.
Can you hear us? Yeah. Dark. Yeah. Uh, but you can start.
We have five minutes with you. Thank you.
Um, so I'm opposing this, um, amendment bill.
Um, I've got a lot of serious concerns about the quality
of the departmental disclosure statements.
It seemed to be a box ticking exercise where they, um,
were quite brief
and inaccurate in talking about obligations towards
domestic rights legislation
and where this bill might impact on those, um,
international rights legislation such
as the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, um, and the Treaty of Wang as well.
So all three of those different, um, rights, um,
affirming legislation and treaties and covenants.
Uh, they talk about things like understood possession
and arbitrary interference in people's, um, communications.
Um, which this bill will expand.
Now, a lot of the problems with this bill probably go back
to the telecommunications inception capability
and security Act back in 2013.
And this bill expands the
concerning provisions in there about interception ready
and intercept interception accessible,
putting those duties on telecommunications providers
and it's expanding them into extra judicial
and extra territorial ways.
Um, and extra territorial is actually mentioned in the bill.
Um, so a lot of the issues probably need to be resolved
with actually amending
that 2013 legislation about the inception capabilities.
'cause I think that's where a lot of the concerns come from
and the concerns that these have drifted away from actual
serious crimes towards political thought crimes
and people expressing political views and opinions
and sharing, um, beliefs
and perspectives that the government doesn't like
or finds concerning
and using interception capability on those
and threatening to shut down service providers, um,
if they do not comply with that, which is a tool
for censorship, which a lot of people are concerned about.
Um, so if you want interest in specific parts
of legislation, you've got part seven A, um,
well clause five that introduce part seven A.
And that's the enforcement of certain breaches
of telecommunication legislation.
And in the explanatory note, they talk about that being
an associated enforcement mechanism
if existing enforcement mechanisms in the ACT are not, uh,
are impractical and example court orders, um,
and penalties.
So they want to go outside the court
and be able to, um, shut down
telecommunication service providers, um,
are arbitrarily based on the executive branch without going
through any kind of court process in terms of warrant, um,
or getting a court order.
Um, so that's a concerning aspect there.
Um, the other thing I raised in my
document, uh, was talking about an actual, uh, threat,
which I think the government should be
seriously considering.
And I get you are focusing on things like starlink
and low Earth orbit satellites
and trying to extend your jurisdiction over those.
And I can see, uh, case for that.
I talk about section 1 1 5
of the Radio Communications Act 1989,
talking about territorial waters.
Maybe you should be expanding that to, um, vessels
or satellites above the territorial waters
and those out just outside the territorial waters.
'cause there could be hostile actors
who could be beaming signals in from above, um, New Zealand
or just outside our territorial waters, um, to cause various
types of damage to New Zealand.
And that could be jamming signals interfere
with various smart technologies that we, our industry
and government becomes reliant on.
Um, or it could have biological effects.
So if they find some signal frequency that interferes
with pollinators such as bees, we could have a case
of economic sabotage
or economic terrorism where the beaming signals in from
low earth satellite or ships outside
or inside our territorial waters,
which could interfere with that.
And that's the kind of threat that a government should be
focusing on rather than policing the freedom of expression
of the local population, which seems to be
the main aim of this bill.
And also collecting levies from starlink, um,
and making sure that they're within your levy
collection, um, system.
Uh, thank any questions. Thank you John.
We'll have to, uh, yeah, we'll have to finish there.
John, we have, um, run out of time
that we had for your submission.
Thank you. So next
we have Okay, zoom.
Yeah.
Cara, thank you so much for your submission.
Kiara, we have five minutes with you. Ken,
Thank you for the opportunity to present to you today.
While I see the proposed amendments in this bill is a
genuine attempt to update a telecommunications on the
international stage in its current state,
it raises many serious aspects that need further discussion
with the users, the constituents of our tedo.
As a Western Australian for the past 30 years,
I've been blessed to be able to call Wellington my home.
I started working on computers at We Digital on the
Frighteners spec 17 years ago.
And 15 years ago, my German husband and I left
and have successfully
for the last 15 years been providing visual effects services
to many international and local projects.
Being at the high end of digital imagery has always required
working with a large amounts
of data initially in expensive hardware
with custom engineered software at one stage, my computer at
where it cost a hundred thousand dollars today.
The cost of our high end hardware is now affordable to most.
And now with AI
and Chat, chat GBT providing instant solutions
to complex queries
and the ability to code allowing hackers
of the future has no limits.
Google says there are five disadvantages to ai, privacy
and ethical concerns, cost
and maintenance, environmental issues, hallucinations
and lack of transparency, privacy, ethical concerns
and lack of transparency are concerns already deeply
ingrained in these clauses
that are proposed in these amendments even
before adding AI into the equation.
And yet the proposed clauses here will cover all future use.
This will do the contrary
and leave us even more vulnerable than we already are.
In the same short period 30 years, we've seen all
of our communication services become redundant.
We all wrote hard letters for personal reasons
and job applications paid our bills
by lining up at the bank at lunchtime, wrote checks queued
and post office to send items.
We do all these things digitally now on our computer.
The effects of this societal impact is huge
and we are still learning the impacts, most notably
with rising mental health concerns,
particularly amongst our youth.
Any changes to make to a digital communications brings
with it the responsibility to protect.
And then, and every one of us
historically, new Zealand's High ethical standing has shown
that we care as a nation, we care about equality given
to women to vote about racism with the anti-apartheid.
But protests, we care about protecting peace
with the anti-Vietnam anti-nuclear protests.
And we most recently care about our
constitutional founding document.
The loss of trust around our personal privacy
will only drive healthy communications underground.
As we saw back with the dark web.
At a time where our democracies are under threat, we need
to nurture freedom of speech,
engage our youth in all conversations, discuss the pros
and cons of every component of our society,
and explore new complimentary hybrids to build transparency,
trust, and support amongst all of us.
Verbalizing a stance is important towards our
own self understanding.
It helps us learn healthy debate to consider other factors
and formulate mature perspectives as we evolve
and build respect and learn tolerance
and understanding of the unfamiliar.
Or at this very moment,
we are seeing this ugly fear happening in the USA
with a Somalian community in now under attack.
We need to instill trust in our governments
and our democratic processes
by ensuring transparency if we are to retain any trust.
So most concerning
of all is the secrecy in which these
amendments have been put forward.
You are our democratic representatives.
We pay you to protect us
and all the community services we require to hop,
operate a healthy society.
And yet this bill was submitted to the house two days
before Christmas, written submissions post two weeks into
the new year, right in the middle
of the summer holiday break.
And here we're today only two days back into Parliament City
already conducting oral submissions.
This is not transparent.
Democracy and practice should the contrary.
This issue has been hidden from the public with 99%
of my savvy digital colleagues having no
idea about this bill.
I myself learned about it on the day submissions closed at
midnight on the 14th of January when a
newsletter was forwarded to me.
I beg you to recommend these a amendments back
to the public forum and invite our experienced digital
community to assist in finding world balanced amendments
that will protect us all
and power us with all these self safeguards.
Thank you so much, Cara, for your submission.
We don't have enough time left for any questions. Thank you.
Okay, thank you. Thank you.
Um, next we have Claire completely online.
Hello, Claire. Hey Kiara.
Kira, we have five minutes with you. Thank you so much.
Um, okay, I, I, um, that I'm cla
and I would like to suggest
that at the telecommunications
and other matter amendment bill in its current
form I oppose.
However, um, I would also like to support
the submissions made by the Free Speech Union and Cara Vula
and others of that nature.
Um, the, the issues of most concern
are the risks to end, to end encryption
and also the opening up the possibility to the five eyes,
um, digital networks
that could spy on New Zealanders.
Even though it is illegal, it does open up,
it oversees people to do that.
Um, the end-to-end inscription is essential infrastructure
that protects journalists, their sources, whistleblowers,
victims of abuse businesses, um,
handling confidential information.
And also it would affect NGOs who are possibly,
um, wanting privacy in their discussions.
Any regulatory approach pressures, providers
to weaker encryption undermines these
protections for everyone.
So really, um, I think the other two people
that I've mentioned have said very much what I do,
um, support.
And so I would like to make the recommendation.
The scheme providers must not in any installation place,
devices that may breach privacy and monitor activities
and discussions that are made in the privacy
of the home or workplace.
The bill must protect the privacy of journalists
and their sources, whistleblowers, victims of abuse
businesses handling confidential information
and ordinary New Zealanders engaging in private
communications by ensuring end-to-end encryption of all
communications stays as a, um,
a base for this.
And I recommend the does not proceed in its current form
and ask that an expansion of surveillance, loss of privacy,
communications, communications be protected.
Until then, I oppose the telecommunication amendment. Bill.
Thank you.
Thanks Claire, for your submission members.
Are there any questions for Claire?
Uh, there are no questions.
Claire, thank you so much
for your contribution. You have a good day.
Thank you Dr. Palm. Thank you. Bye-bye.
Uh, now we move to Matthew Woods.
Thank
You. How's that switch
To us, the tape? Oh, yes,
Matthew, we can hear you.
Oh, yes, now we can see you as well. Thank you.
Um, thank you so much. We have five minutes with you. Thank
You. Okay.
My name is Matthew Woods.
For 25 years I've worked in telecommunications
and security, particularly in fiber
and satellite technologies.
My work has taken me from the ground level
of infrastructure all the way
to international organizations.
I was involved in the early development
of small apture terminal data communications,
including work supporting the comprehensive nuclear test
band treaty organization.
I've watched the evolution
of IP communications from its infancy
to the globally interconnected system we rely on today.
I say this not to talk about myself,
but to make one thing clear.
I understand communication systems, how they work,
how they fail, and how they can be misused.
And today what really concerns me is the opportunity
for government overreach.
In 2022, new Zealanders witnessed something meaning,
thought they would never see in this country.
They saw what happens when a government believes it has the
authority to control, to discriminate
and to enforce without accountability.
The consequences of that period were not temporary.
They've left deep social scars deeper than any racial
or cultural division in our history.
Families were divided, communities were fractured,
and trust was broken from mandates
to the way descent was handled.
The people of New Zealand saw the full force of a government
that had forgotten its place.
And that is why I'm here today.
I'm here representing the people of New Zealand
and I'm here to remind you that you work for us.
The amendment bill does not serve the people of New Zealand.
It does not make us safer.
It does not make our communications more secure.
It does not protect our rights
and our privacy and our freedoms.
What it does do is expand government control.
It creates new avenues for surveillance.
It creates new opportunities for revenue,
and it attempts to regulate technologies
that the government will never be able to fully control.
Not now, not in the future, not in a decentralized world.
We've already seen what happens when government tries
to centralize control over systems.
It does not understand. Look at manage my health.
Look at the Waikato DHB
two catastrophic failures costing this country
hundreds of millions of dollars.
These were not small mistakes.
They were systematic failures that exposed our unprepared
and unequipped government agencies are
to manage complex digital infrastructure.
Yet while these failures were unfolding,
the taxpayer money was being burned.
Another crisis was happening, one that this government
and the previous government chose to ignore.
Scammers have extracted hundreds of millions
of dollars from elderly, vulnerable,
and hardworking New Zealanders.
This is not a small issue, this not an unavoidable issue.
This is an issue that could be dramatically reduced if the
government simply made banks liable
as many other countries have already done.
But instead of protecting citizens,
the government is here today asking
for more power over them.
So let me say this clearly.
It is we the people who need oversight over the politicians,
not the other way round.
We need transparency in how decisions are made.
We need accountability for failures.
We need assurance that laws are being written
for the benefit of the taxpayer.
Not to expand enforcement powers not
to increase surveillance,
and not to tighten control over the daily
lives of New Zealanders.
We are living in a decentralized paradigm.
Technology is decentralizing, information is decentralizing,
communities are decentralizing.
Power is decentralizing whether governments like it
or not, the end of centralized control is over.
And this bill attempts to claw back authority as out of step
with the world we are moving into.
We've seen in the U-F-B-R-B-I, the government spent hundreds
of millions of taxpayers' money
and there's possibly not one single customer left.
A clear example along with the police
and political performance over the last five years
that government often get it wrong with little
to no accountability.
What I would like to say is we're reminding you
that your role is to serve us
and not to monitor us, not
to track us and not to control us.
Your duty is to protect our rights, our freedoms,
and our privacy not to erode them.
I don't believe this amendment Bill serves New Zealanders.
It serves the government
and that is why I asked to reject it.
Thank you.
Thank you. Any quick questions? Uh, no.
There are no questions. Thank you so much, uh,
Matthew for your submission.
Thank you. Bye-bye. Uh, next we go to Kevin.
Kevin Murphy.
Can You hear me?
Hello? Yes, we can hear you Kevin. Thank you so much.
We can't see you though. Um,
but if you wish to turn your camera on, um, that, um,
it's up to you, but otherwise you can
start speaking to your submission.
Yeah, okay. Yeah, I'm trying to get the video to work.
Sorry. Okay. Um, alright.
Yeah, I'm not sure what's going on. Okay.
Five minutes with you. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, thank you for the opportunity
to address you today.
I would like to clarify the reason
for delivering a verbal submission.
Ultimately, this decision stems from the sense
of frustration regarding what I perceive as a failure
of central and local government
to honor the principles of democracy.
Consequently, I believe that public confidence
and trust in government institutions
and bureaucracies are waning.
Uh, so what implications does this
have for the current bill?
The implications are significant
and I will elaborate on this.
Shortly over the Christmas and New Year period, councils
and governments were presenting bills for public comment.
This is an exceptionally busy period for individuals,
yet the government
and local councils have chosen to
advance legal legislation
that would profoundly impact our futures.
It seems improbable that this timing is merely coincidental.
This brings me back to my initial assertion
regarding the erosion of trust in government.
I contend that this diminishment
of the goodwill from the people
is a critical challenge facing our nation.
There exists a pervasive sense of dissatisfaction
with our government's system, irrespective
of the political party in power.
Moreover, I believe the media bears some
responsibility in this regard.
It has not fulfilled its role as a checks
and balance against government action.
The independence that ought
to characterize the media appears compromised leading
to a loss of impartiality.
Unsurprisingly, individuals now turn
to social media platforms for information.
This situation brings us back to the current bill,
which proposes to infringe upon the citizen's right
to privacy by enabling government
to access communication on social media platforms.
Regardless of one's view on the advantages
and disadvantages of these measures,
there are some fundamental questions to consider.
Can the citizens of New Zealand trust the government
and bureaucracy with this information?
The answer is an equivocal no.
Can the public trust that there will be no breaches
of confidentiality?
The answer again is no.
Can citizens have confidence that the government
and bureaucracy will appropriately handle this information?
The answer remains no.
New Zealand does not require such legislation.
We do not need a surveillance state.
What is truly needed is authentic principled leadership
that can restore trust
and confidence among the people of New Zealand.
We must still, we must instill hope
and faith that citizens' efforts
will not be squandered on misguided government policies.
The progress of our country is contingent upon the buy-in
of the populace, which underscores the importance
of trust and confidence.
When the community is engaged, anything is possible,
by harnessing the pioneering spirit that defines our nation,
we can achieve great feats.
We must nurture the ideas of citizens,
engage creative thinkers,
and encourage those willing to think innovatively.
The number eight y mentality has historical,
historically fostered remarkable creative, inventive
inventiveness and problem solving abilities, which I believe
represents some of New Zealand's greater strengths.
Conversely, a surveillance state will inhibit
and hinder this potential.
It is imperative that bureaucrats step back
from interfering in our lives and our private conversation.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Kevin.
Um, it's nearly five minutes,
so thank you so much for your submission.
Thank you. Uh, next we have Rex
Andy in person.
Online. Online, okay.
Right. Good afternoon.
Hello. Thank you so much for your submission.
Can you hear me? Oh, yes,
We can see. There we go. I've
just uncovered my, uh,
Camera.
Thank you. Letting submit here today.
You can't even keep our health details safe.
You're negotiating with hackers already
and you want more powers.
You want to stop, you know, stop all our rights.
You haven't even taken account of the bill of rights,
which we have the right not to be surveilled by.
You. Look at what you've done with our health details.
You've been negotiating with hackers already.
And also our government has watched an Iranian diplomat rape
his 9-year-old daughter.
The GCSB were watching him
and they didn't charge him, expel him
or get anything done about that
because you wanted the information.
So how can we trust you with this? This is, this is crazy.
You also, I I just want you to bring the bill.
We do not need further surveillance.
You've already got powers and you've already misused them.
You've changed the definition of liable person
to include overseas providers.
Do you think that anyone overseas is gonna be want to,
you know, listen to you
and make them subject to New Zealand law?
Stop trying to shift the goalposts.
The secretary of the NBIE will become the chief
and be able to indirectly stop overseas content.
I'd like you to amend Section 10.
The T-I-S-C-A to state service providers are not required
to build back doors
or decrypt communications that are end-to-end encrypted.
You have just turned into a jolly giant curtain, twitch
and snoop and I say no men.
Section five of the telecoms act to limit the list
of RASQ matters by replacing the word, including
with a short list, limited to technical delivery of services
and not to include editorial content
or like that little snoop
behind the curtains twitching away wanting to police
what we want to look at.
We are your boss.
You are meant to serve us as the previous speaker said,
any words you don't like, come on.
Delete item 10 of the new schedule four in its entirety.
Stop overriding and ignoring the bill of rights.
These are our rights. Amend 60 60 5G two.
The Radio Communications Act.
So the secretary doesn't just rely quotes solely on summary
information, quotes from a surveillance agency
or the commerce commission.
We need proof, not just the say so of woke public servants.
These are the same public servants that tell us
that men can get pregnant and women have penises.
So there'll be more lies.
You can't do it on reckons or feelings.
And before you revoke a license based on hearsay,
beholder should have the right of reply.
You set yourselves up as judge jury executioner
to override our rights
to take our rights away like a giant nanny state.
And you sicken and disgust me. Goodbye.
Goodbye. Have a good day. Thank you.
Um, alright members, we move on to next submitter.
Um, actually we are waiting for the next image.
We have Sue Crawfish. Oh, we have Sue. Okay.
I thought she said goodbye. I think it's a freeze frame.
Awfully quiet otherwise. Oh, Sue's online.
Um, hello Sue, can you hear me?
Yes, I can. Can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you. Thank you so much.
We have five minutes with you. Great.
Thank you. Thank you.
Um, yeah, so I've been reading through the, um, the bill
and, um, various other party submissions and so forth
and listening to, um, you know,
the submissions this morning.
Um, a couple of things that I was sort of interested in
and I just, uh, throw it out there.
Um, what is the purpose of the bill?
Now you might not need to answer that,
but that is a question I'm asking.
What is the purpose of the bill?
So Sue, how the select committee process works is
that you get the opportunity to submit on the bill
and the select committee members get the opportunity
to ask questions to you.
Yeah. Okay. Well,
it's just a general question to the ether then.
Um, and, you know, what is the actual threat?
That's another general question to the ether.
Um, and why does the government need this power? Why?
Um, I just have also looked at the Privacy Act, uh, 2020.
And I don't grant access
to my personal information being surveilled, uh,
by the government or any anywhere else.
That's my personal information.
So I do not grant access to that under the Privacy Act 2020
because if I send an email to somebody
or I'm looking at, uh, information
and having messaging with somebody
that's private information, it's my personal data.
It's uncovered under the data privacy bill as well.
Um, one of the things in the, uh, in the legislation,
it talks about New Zealand license holders, um, to, uh,
block offshore operators if, um, he, if they're sort of,
uh, told to do so.
I think that's really, um, awful that, um, you know,
New Zealand, uh, license holders would have that role.
Uh, in fact, they actually want, uh, these, uh,
offshore parties to access their infrastructure
because there's economics involved here.
They're getting paid for that.
So why would they then turn around
and tell them to be blocked?
Tell them, uh, that, sorry, you, you need to be blocked.
Now also, the secretary of MBIE,
suddenly he's got all these powers, these,
so one man has got all these powers to basically control
what we see, what we do, who we speak to, um, you know,
in our private communications anyway, what business
of it is, is it of him, his to know
or to stop us from transacting in that way?
I've worked in banking for 30 years
and I do key encryption on data, on,
on transaction processing.
And, you know, everybody in my industry,
and particularly Matt Woods who spoke earlier, knows
that key encryption is very important for privacy of data,
privacy of transactional data and so forth.
Just as encryption is really important for companies.
Um, sharing confidential information, um, you know,
working on, um, RFPs, et cetera.
Can you imagine if that sort of information got out
to the wider public domain?
Um, yeah. That's why encryption is so important in,
in the way that we communicate.
Also alongside that, if there is this, um, encryption, uh,
removal that suddenly means
that my data is probably sitting on an
offshore server somewhere.
My information is sitting on an offshore server somewhere,
you know, like, uh, from these, uh,
third party offshore providers.
Uh, so suddenly the, the, my data is not personal anymore.
It's sitting out there in the public domain, potentially,
um, accessible right on a data server somewhere.
Um, it just seems to me that as you know, some
of the other people said, we are just
trying to move backwards.
As, as Matt Wood said, we have a centralized,
a decentralized system now we cannot try
and control everything the way
that we may have done in the past.
And by doing what we're trying to do,
we're actually removing really critical
infrastructure and moving backwards.
We are not progressing, we're not moving
with the times in the sense that we're trying to build more,
um, safe infrastructure, um, you know, safer ways
of our channels and so forth.
We're actually removing it.
And, and that to me seems a backwards step.
Um, also the providers are just gonna go somewhere else
and, you know, other people will just fill in the gap.
Um, if, if these providers do move away, uh,
there'll be new innovative ways that people come up to
come up with to actually find more, um, satisfactory ways
of communicating where,
where the government isn't looking at their information.
So yeah, that's all I've sort of got for now.
That's good. Well time. Thank you so much, Sue.
Thanks for your, thank you. Thank you.
Uh, next we have Richie, uh, Richie again. Zoom.
Yeah. Uh, Richie,
can you please click on to be on the panel?
Yes. Thank you so much. Um, can you hear me?
Yes, I can hear you. Oh, that's good.
Uh, we have five minutes with you. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Good afternoon Tu Thank you
for hearing my submission.
This committee has a very important role in measuring
and assuring that New Zealanders maintain data autonomy,
which New Zealand does not have a great track record as well
as maintain their right to free speech
and access to information.
Um, my concerns are the following, privacy
and surveillance, using the words compel compliance versus
compel capability,
the enforcement pressure can effectively provide, uh,
force providers to build interceptor capability even
for encrypted services.
And in practice, this means that, that,
that there are pressures for them
to weaken the end-to-end encryption
and create, um, exceptional access,
which is a systemic privacy vulnerability.
The other one is, um,
the secretary can target a non-compliant service provider
based on reasonable belief of breach
or the exa act enforcement notice.
And the problems that have been identified
by the law society are that it is non-compliant
'cause it's used for alleged breaches, which is unclear.
Drafting the trigger phrase practical difficulties
is really vague.
Um, too much power for one person license restriction
and revocation with a broad discretion,
which is far too high risk.
It can rely on summary agency info.
There is no rea um, clear requirement on notices
or right to respond.
The scope is not limited to, um, offshore providers only.
There's a mismatch with the policy intent.
The private impact, the privacy impact is
that heavy enforcement levers will cause providers
to over comply, which, uh, quietly reducing privacy for
everyone, um, free speech and on the ground info.
It has a chilling effect on those
'cause People who think secure comment
comms can be accessed.
They will self censor. And these are people like
whistleblowers employees, um, victims
or witnesses, journalists sources, community organizers
and the result will be less law, lawful reporting
of wrongdoing and suppression without censorship causing
modern civic reporting.
Relying on encrypted messaging for protests.
Safety, safety, emergency updates,
local incident reporting, corruption or exploitation tips.
And if platforms face sanctions,
they will restrict features, reduce anonymity,
increase monitoring and cause indirect suppression
of real world reporting.
The due process link unclear standards
and summary evidence equals risk averse takedowns
by providers and risk averse silence by users.
One of the main concerns
for me has been New Zealand's breach record.
We have a horrible breach record to be honest.
And people's data autonomy is absolutely not safe here.
And this is not about whether people want to hide things.
This is about the fact
that people have the right to that privacy.
The New Zealand breach history,
and I was going to find every one of them,
but I couldn't have covered it in five minutes.
So I found only the largest ones.
New Zealand has thousands of cyber incidents every year
and already struggles to protect sensitive systems cert.
And the NSC, uh, sorry, the NCSC
have reported 7,935
incidents in 2023 alone
with 18.3 million direct
financial losses reported.
The privacy commissioner reported triaging
and reviewing 864 privacy breaches
notified in the 2024 year, according to its annual report.
Major data breach
or incidents roughly over the last 10 years.
As I said, I couldn't bring them all up.
2018 we had the vector orange outage app, uh, sorry,
app outage, which exploited vulnerability,
possible personnel info, the 2020
NZX cyber track disrupted trading
and market operations that had a national impact,
the 2021 Waikato, DHB ransomware
and data exfiltration system disruption causing
sensitive patient and staff data to be compromised.
The 2023 Latitude financial, um, system
described as New Zealand's largest known breach.
The OPC opened an investigation reporting indicated over
a million New Zealanders were affected in 2024,
the New Zealand Parliamentary Council office intrusion.
Um, the 2021 attack was publicly attributed in 2024
and the state linked targeting of democratic institutions
late 2025 January, 2026,
the managed my health intrusion,
major health portal breach reporting indicates hundred
and 26,000 patients
and hundreds of thousands of documents involved.
The OPC issued public guidance for impacted people
early 2026, the neighborly breach.
But yeah, I have to, sorry to interrupt you.
There we have yeah. Run out of time.
Thank you so much for your submission.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
So we go and private session now.